---
layout: post
title:  "Medicare Blogs"
date:   2020-08-02 10:50:05 +0000
image: /assets/images/startup2.jpg

---
1.1. Is Medicare free at age 65? The cost for Medicare varies depending on the years spent paying Medicare taxes or using Social Security, coverage type, and enrollment timeliness. If you qualify for premium-free Part A, you have only the monthly premium for Part B as well as the deductibles for each plan. 
 
Original Medicare is open to people 65 and older, as well as to other people with chronic conditions. Original Medicare includes Part A and Part B, which cover hospital and medical insurance. Parts D is also available, covering prescription drug costs. Part C is offered through Medicare-approved private companies and offers a full package of Parts A, B, and often D with additional dental, hearing, and vision coverage. 
Premium-free Part A Many people do not pay monthly premiums for Medicare Part A because they or their spouse have paid taxes to Medicare for more than 40 quarters (10 years) while working. If you receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits or retirement benefits from the Railroad Retirement Board, or if you had Medicare-covered government employment, you also do not have to pay Part A premiums. 
 
People younger than 65 pay no Part A premiums if they have 24-month Social Security benefits or if they have End-Stage Renal Disease and meet a few other conditions. 
Part A Premiums for Part A are decided based on how long you paid Medicare taxes. If you paid these taxes for 30-39 quarters, the premium costs $252 per month. If you paid them for less than 30 quarters, the premium costs $458 per month (in 2020). 
 
Deductibles for hospital stays are $1,408 for each benefit period. There is no coinsurance cost until after 60 days of hospital stay. 
 
Home health care services and hospice care are $0. Copayment for symptom control and pain medications is $5. You pay 5 percent of the Medicare-approved amount for respite care. 
 
Skilled nursing facility stays cost $0 for the first 20 days for each benefit period. Coinsurance costs are $176 for days from three weeks to 100 days stay for each benefit period. Beyond 100 days, you are responsible for all costs. 
 
The late enrollment fee for Part A premiums is an additional 10%, paid for twice as many years as you wait to enroll. 
Part B Premiums for Part B are $144.60 standard (in 2020). If you claim more than $87,000 as an individual or $174,000 as a couple, you will pay more. 
 
The Part B deductible is $198. After you meet the deductible, you pay 20% of the Medicare-approved amount for doctor services, outpatient therapy, and durable medical equipment. 
 
Clinical laboratory services and home health services are $0. For partial hospitalization mental health services, you pay coinsurance for each day and a percentage of the Medicare-approved amount for services. 
 
For outpatient hospital services, you pay a copayment for each service. The maximum is capped at the deductible for inpatient stays. 
 
The late enrollment fee for Part B lasts for as long as you have Part B. For every twelve months you went without enrolling, you will pay an additional 10% of the standard premium rate. 
Parts C and D Medicare Advantage Plans, also known as Part C, vary in the price of their monthly premiums. Medicare Part D, or prescription drug coverage, is more expensive for those making more than $87,000 as an individual or $174,000 as a couple. 
 
For all of your Medicare questions, speak with your Fidelis agent. 
1.2. What happens if I don’t enroll in Medicare at 65? Standard eligibility for coverage starts at age 65. Three months before you turn 65, Medicare will mail you your red, white, and blue Medicare card along with instructions to enroll. 
 
Once you enroll in Social Security, it is mandatory to enroll in Medicare Part A (hospital insurance). If you or your spouse has worked for ten years (40 quarters) and paid Medicare taxes, you are automatically eligible for premium-free Part A coverage. 
Initial Enrollment You must enroll in Medicare within a 7-month Initial Enrollment Period surrounding the month you turn 65. Enrollment extends three months before and three months after the month of your 65th birthday. 
Special Enrollment For those who are still getting health coverage through a group health plan with their employer (or their spouse’s employer), they are able to use a Special Enrollment Period. The Special Enrollment Period lasts 8 months and begins the month after employment or coverage ends. 
Late Enrollment Penalties If you fail to enroll during your Initial Enrollment Period and do not qualify for a Special Enrollment Period, you can sign up during the General Enrollment Period from January 1 to March 31 of each year. However, you will have to pay a late enrollment penalty. 
Medicare Part A If you have to buy Part A, the late enrollment penalty will add 10% to your monthly premium. The higher premium will last for twice the number of years that you failed to enroll. 
Medicare Part B If you have to buy Part B, the late enrollment penalty adds 10% of the standard premium rate for each 12-month period you went without signing up. This lasts as long as you hold Part B coverage. The standard premium rate is $144.60. 
Medicare Part D If you do not buy Part D when you become eligible to enroll, you may have to pay a late enrollment fee. While you have creditable coverage, you do not have to have Part D. If you are without creditable coverage for 63 or more days before you enroll in Part D, you may have to pay a late enrollment fee. 
 
If you choose not to enroll in Medicare Advantage Plans (Part C) or Medicare Part D, you will not have to pay a late penalty toward Part D coverage. 
 
For all of your Medicare questions, speak with your Fidelis agent. 
1.3. What is the difference between Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage Plans? Original Medicare includes Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) and Medicare Part B (Medical Insurance). Medicare Advantage Plans are bundled plans that include Part A, Part B, and some prescription coverage, often with additional dental, vision, or hearing plans. 
Original Medicare Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) is offered through Original Medicare and covers hospital stays, hospice, and care in a skilled nursing facility, with some coverage for home health care. 
 
Medicare Part B (Medical Insurance) is offered through Original Medicare and covers outpatient services, medical supplies, some doctors’ services, and preventive services. 
Medicare Advantage Plans Medicare Advantage (MA) Plans (often called “Part C”) are offered by private companies and insurance companies approved by Medicare. These offer Part A and Part B with additional coverage, many offering coverage for prescription drugs.  
 
These plans cover all Medicare services, but they are paid through the company and not through Original Medicare. Many offer vision, hearing, and dental plans as part of the coverage. The following are common plan types. 
HMO Plans Health Management Organization (HMO) Plans require that you receive care from providers that are in the plan’s network. If the service is not in-network, you pay the full cost. Exceptions are for emergency care, out-of-area urgent care, or out-of-area dialysis. 
 
Most HMO plans require you to have a primary care doctor and require referrals to see specialists for most services. Many plans offer prescription drug coverage. 
PPO Plans Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) Plans have you pay more for using the services of doctors, hospitals, and other providers that are not in-network. Many plans offer prescription drug coverage. 
 
You can go to any doctor, hospital, or health care provider that is in-network, and do not need a primary care doctor. You do not need a referral to see specialists, but in-network specialists will be less costly. 
PFFS Plans Private Fee-for-Service plans determine how much they pay health care providers and what you owe. You may pay more for the services of someone not in-network if the plan has a network. You only need to pay the copayments at the time of service. 
 
You can receive treatment from any health care provider that agrees with the plan’s payment terms and agrees to treat you. You do not need a primary care doctor or referrals to see specialists. Some plans may not offer drug coverage. 
Special Needs Plans (SNP) Medicare SNPs are limited to people with chronic conditions, those living in institutions, or those who are dual-eligible with Medicare and Medicaid. 
 
All SNPs carry prescription drug coverage. Most SNPs require a primary care doctor and referrals for specialists. 
Medicare Part D Medicare Part D (prescription drug coverage) is offered through Medicare but is not a part of Original Medicare.  
Medicare Supplement Insurance (Medigap) Medigap plans are offered by private companies to help pay remaining expenses not covered by Original Medicare. These expenses include copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles. 
 
These plans cannot pay the Part B deductible but offer additional service Medicare cannot. Some policies cover medical care outside of the U.S. 
 
Medigap policies are held in addition to Medicare Part A and Part B. 
 
For all of your Medicare questions, speak with your Fidelis agent. 
1.4. What is covered by Medicare Part D? 
Coverage Medicare Part D stands for Medicare Prescription Drug Plan, also known as PDPs. 
 
Part D Plans follow a standard level of drug coverage set by Medicare. The list of covered prescription drugs is called a formulary, and drugs are grouped under different tiers based on copayment price. 
 
Part D plans cover the most commonly prescribed categories and classes of drugs. Within each drug category, the plan offers coverage for at least 2 drugs. These will often include brand-name and prescription options. 
 
If the drug you need is not listed in your plan’s formulary, you and your prescriber can apply for an exception. 
 
Tiers are organized by copayment needed, based often on brand-name costs. Generic drugs will be in tiers with lower copayments and brand-name non-preferred drugs will be in tiers with higher copayments. 
Payments Payments are based on your modified adjusted gross income. Most Part D plans are paid with a monthly premium, in addition to Medicare Part B monthly premiums. 
 
Those reporting less than $87,000 on an individual tax return or $174,000 on a joint tax return will only be responsible for their monthly premium. People above this income have to pay the Part D income-related monthly adjustment amount (Part D-IRMAA). Part D-IRMAA is paid directly to Medicare and may be deducted from Social Security checks or billed. 
 
A late-enrollment penalty can be added to the monthly premium if you lack Part D coverage, Medicare Advantage Plan (Part C), or a creditable prescription drug coverage (that covers as much as Part D) for 63 or more days after your Initial Enrollment Period ends. 
 
The late-enrollment penalty is calculated by multiplying 1% of the national base beneficiary premium for each month without Part D coverage. People who get Extra Help through Medicare do not pay this penalty. 
 
Yearly deductibles for Medicare Part D will not be more than $435 for 2020, according to the Medicare website. Some plans do not have deductibles. 
 
Copayments kick in after the yearly deductible is paid (if applicable), and will be a set amount based on the tier each drug is under. All drugs in the same tier will require the same copayment. 
The Coverage Gap After payments toward prescription drugs exceed $4,020 (for 2020), you will have surpassed the limit that the Part D plan will pay for covered drugs. 
 
People in the coverage gap will pay 25% of the cost of prescription drugs after they reach this point. Out-of-pocket costs help the insured get out of the coverage gap. 
 
For brand-name drugs, the manufacturer pays 70% of the drug’s cost as a discount. You pay 25% of the cost of the drug and 25% of the dispensing fee. What goes toward the out-of-pocket is the amount you pay plus the amount paid by the manufacturer. 
 
For generic drugs, Medicare pays for 75% of a drug’s total cost. You pay 25% of the cost of the drug plus the full dispensing fee. The amount you pay goes toward out-of-pocket spending. 
 
Copayments, manufacturer’s discounts, the yearly deductible, and payments for prescriptions go toward the coverage gap. 
 
Once out-of-pocket spending reaches $6,350 (in 2020), you are out of the coverage gap and covered by “catastrophic coverage.” From then on, you pay only small copayments for prescriptions through the end of the year. 
 
For all of your Medicare questions, speak with your Fidelis agent. 
